{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1038\cocoasubrtf360
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww10800\viewh8400\viewkind0
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-1440\sl288\slmult1\sa40\ql\qnatural

\f0\fs24 \cf0 Animals are an important part of a healthy ecosystem\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-1440\sl288\slmult1\sa60\ql\qnatural

\b \cf0 Every garden is unique. \
There is no one way to garden. \
Be observant. \
Experience different gardening ideas and cultural traditions by reading, visiting gardens, attending workshops, and talking to gardeners. There are online videos on any topic. \uc0\u8232 The more ideas you experience, the easier it will be to create the gardens you want. Learn from the experience of others.\
Its fun and exciting to watch your garden grow and change \uc0\u8232 as you learn.\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-1440\sl288\slmult1\sa40\ql\qnatural

\b0 \cf0 \'95 \uc0\u8232 Books: Eliot Coleman; 
\i The New Organic Grower, Four Season Harvest, The Winter Harvest Handbook (also online videos), 
\i0 Rodale press books, ACRES USA magazine and bookstore
\i \
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-1440\sl288\slmult1\sa40\ql\qnatural

\i0 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd-1\expndtw-2
\'95 \uc0\u8232 Seed catalogs are excellent sources of planting information: \u8232 FEDCO, Johnny\'92s, Seed Savers\'85 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \
\'95 Visit gardens, farms, the MOGFA Country Fair and workshops\'85\
\
Simple tools are all you need: shovel, spading fork, trowel, rake, hoe, wheelbarrow.\
Living an hour from the ocean, I collect seaweed from the shore for mulching and adding to the compost pile. Seaweed adds vital trace minerals to the soil and food for microorganisms to eat. \
\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-1440\sl288\slmult1\sa160\ql\qnatural

\i\fs26 \cf0 Suggestions to make gardening enjoyable with minimal work.
\i0\b\fs24 \
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-1440\sl288\slmult1\sa40\ql\qnatural

\fs28 \cf0 Mimic nature. \uc0\u8232 To increase soil fertility, keep soil covered with mulch or plants. \
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-1440\sl288\slmult1\sa40\ql\qnatural

\b0\fs24 \cf0 \'95 Keeps soil temperature and moisture consistent.\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-1440\sl288\slmult1\sa40\ql\qnatural
\cf0 \kerning1\expnd-1\expndtw-2
\'95 \uc0\u8232 Feeds soil microorganisms, increases soil fertility, and keeps weeds from growing.\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \
\'95 Use straw, leaves, seaweed, or compost for mulching beds.\
\'95 Prepare (mulch) your beds in the fall, so they are ready to plant in the spring.\
\'95 Do not use herbicides, pesticides, insecticides, fungicides or commercial fertilizers (NPK).\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-1440\sl288\slmult1\sa40\ql\qnatural

\b\fs28 \cf0 Make permanent beds for plants, and paths for walking. \uc0\u8232 
\fs24 Do not walk on the soil where you grow plants.\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-1440\sl288\slmult1\sa40\ql\qnatural

\b0 \cf0 \'95 \uc0\u8232 Do not plow or rototil soil. This turns up new weed seeds, disturbs soil structure and microorganisms, and destroys organic matter.\
\'95 Aerate soil with a spading fork or broad fork to eliminate soil compaction.\
\'95 Start new beds using a thick mulch (straw or leaves) to eliminate existing plants.\
\'95 For areas with poor soil, use a heavy mulch and compost, or double dig to speed-up building soil fertility.\
\'95 \uc0\u8232 Test your soil pH and add lime if needed. Rock powders add slow release trace minerals; Azomite, greensand, rock phosphate, granite dust, etc. \
\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-1440\sl288\slmult1\sa40\ql\qnatural

\b\fs28 \cf0 Make a smaller, efficient garden with multi-use growing areas.  \
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-1440\sl288\slmult1\sa40\ql\qnatural

\b0\fs24 \cf0 \'95 \uc0\u8232 A well-tended smaller garden can produce abundant food. A large, weedy out-of-control garden is not fun. Photos and accounts of traditional cultures show intensively planted areas that are very productive.\
\'95 \uc0\u8232 Make successional plantings throughout the season for a continuous supply of food. Plants have different growing needs and times which help spread gardening work over the entire season.\
\'95 Create more planting areas throughout the season as you need them.\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-1440\sl288\slmult1\sa40\ql\qnatural

\fs34 \cf0 Soil and Fertility\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-1440\sl288\slmult1\sa40\ql\qnatural

\fs24 \cf0 Land for raising plants and animals is a limited resource on this planet. \
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-1440\sl288\slmult1\sa40\ql\qnatural

\b \cf0 \
Nature sets the rules: 
\b0 When humans interfere with \'93natures\'92 rules\'94 the entire environment is affected \'85 soil, water, air, animal and human inhabitants, and climate. \
Removing native vegetation (trees, shrubs, grass, etc.) by clear cutting, over-grazing or tiling, exposes the soil to wind and rain/water erosion, and destroys the soil structure. Chemical biocides and synthetic fertilizers kill organisms in the soil, further destroying soil structure. Irrigation can cause soils to become saline and unable to grow plants.\
Desertification of agricultural areas is a serious and growing problem all over the world.\

\b Protect the soil habitat: 
\b0 Nature covers the ground all the time. A cover buffers the impact of raindrops, the heat of the sun, improves soil structure, increases water infiltration and reduces evaporation. Healthy soil holds together and provides microbes and plant roots an environment where they can thrive. Soil will have resilience, and not be as effected by dry periods.\

\b Provide diversity: 
\b0 The more biodiversity in the system, the healthier and more resilient it is. If you have diversity above ground, you have diversity below ground. Some prairies had 9 species of plants per square foot. There are always some plants growing in changeable weather; windy, dry, wet, cool or warm.\

\b In fertile soils 
\b0 plants grow at an optimum rate enhancing flavor, tenderness and nutritional value. Fertile soils help plants resist pests and diseases. \
Synthetic fertilizers and toxic biocides kill the living organisms of the plant-microbal bridge. Without their help, it is not possible for us to obtain the trace elements our bodies need to stay healthy, or for the plants and soil to be healthy.\
\
Soil under mulch or plants is moist, rich, dark and sweet smelling.\
During a dry period, the geese overgrazed this area. Without enough plant cover, soil can heat up and \'93cook\'94. When people cut lawns too short, they cook the soil and their grass browns-out and dies.\

\b Green growing cover plants provide the most benefit as they add the power of photosynthesis.\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-1440\sl288\slmult1\sa40\ql\qnatural

\b0 \cf0 Bare soil areas can also heat up and \'93cook\'94 the soil. \
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-1440\sl288\slmult1\sa40\ql\qnatural

\i\fs28 \cf0 \'93Most life-forms obtain their energy either directly or indirectly from the sun, via the process of photosynthesis.\'94
\i0\b\fs24 \
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-1440\sl288\slmult1\sa40\ql\qnatural

\i\b0 \cf0 SOS: Save our Soils,
\i0  Dr. Christine Jones, 
\i ACRES USA, 
\i0 March 2015\
Barn bedding mulch\
Seaweed mulch\
Winter mulch of dead celery plants over a summer seaweed mulch\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-1440\sl288\slmult1\sa200\ql\qnatural

\i\fs30 \cf0 2006 Starting my new garden\'85 \
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-1440\sl288\slmult1\sa200\ql\qnatural

\i0\b\fs24 \cf0 My garden is near the house so it is convenient for tending and picking. 
\b0 \

\b Raised beds:
\b0  We have a high water table, so I had to build raised beds. Beds are 4\'92 wide x 10\'92 long with space between to walk and move a wheelbarrow. The boards are 2\'94 thick, 10\'94 high rough-sawn hemlock from a local sawmill. Wood chips between beds provided a dry, clean and weed free space.\

\b Soil preparation:
\b0  The soil was heavy clay and I did not see any earthworms. There was no extra soil to fill the raised beds, so I bought topsoil. This soil needed organic matter, lime, and rock powders for trace minerals. In the past, to make compost, I had sources of cow manure and leaves, but starting again I had to find new sources. Raising animals (sheep, chickens and geese) was a source for manure and bedding materials (hay and straw.) Garden excess and weeds were fed to the animals, and other plant material went on the compost pile. \

\b Double digging:
\b0  To get a faster start creating more organic matter in my soil, I double dig the beds, making a foot wide trench across the width of the bed, filling it with material to decompose (leaves, animal manure and bedding, etc.). Then making another trench beside it, putting the soil from the new trench on top of the compostable material just placed in the previous trench.\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-1440\sl288\slmult1\sa40\ql\qnatural

\b \cf0 Corner brackets
\b0  for raised beds are sold, but are expensive. \
My first raised beds were fastened with 6\'94 long screws. A corded drill with hex bit was needed for the power to drive in the screws.\
On the internet, I saw the use of Simpson Strong-Tie Plates, which can be easily bent to a 90\'b0 angle and then fastened with smaller screws using a battery screw gun. I now use these plates. Support stakes on the bed sides are now not necessary.\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-1440\sl288\slmult1\sa60\ql\qnatural

\b \cf0 Perennial plants\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-1440\sl288\slmult1\sa200\ql\qnatural

\b0 \cf0 Plants that come up year after year like asparagus, rhubarb, berry bushes and grapes have their own beds outside of the main vegetable garden. Fruit trees have their own area.\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-1440\sl240\sb80\ql\qnatural
\cf0 Below: Fruit trees, two asparagus beds, and blueberries, raspberries and strawberries (long bed) with grapes in behind.\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-1440\sl288\slmult1\sa60\ql\qnatural

\b\fs28 \cf0 Creative raised beds\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-1440\sl288\slmult1\sa200\ql\qnatural

\b0\fs24 \cf0 I saw these wonderful creative raised beds when I was driving around. Amazing and fun!\
The gardener mulched some of them with seaweed!\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-1440\sl288\slmult1\sa40\ql\qnatural

\b \cf0 Starting plants inside 
\b0 gives you a head start on spring. In Maine, our spring is cold because of the effect of the ocean, so getting an early start makes a big difference.\
Shelves can be made to hold several light fixtures for growing lights.\
Originally, I simply started with lights under a table, a chain going over the table to hold the lights up and the plants on the floor. The chain was adjustable to change the height as the plants grow.\
Garden centers sell timers, so you can set the times you want the lights on and off.\
The area should be warm, 65\'b0+ so the seeds will germinate and plants grow. I use a small room with a south window. If the temperature is too cool I use a small heater to make it warmer.\
The top shelf has two cell trays of onions, the first plants I start. The second shelf has kale in 6-pack trays and 3\'94 pots with short edible podded peas.\
The bottom shelf has bowls of sprouting grains for the chickens and geese.\
Narrow trays (cut in 3 sections), plug tray, 4-pack, 6-pack and pots.\

\b Seed starting  \
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-1440\sl288\slmult1\sa40\ql\qnatural

\b0 \cf0 A variety of seed starting trays are available.\
Cell trays in different sizes make starting seeds easy, as plants have their own growing space. Starting smaller numbers of several seeds saves space and makes succession planting less work. It is easy to care for a small tray of plants in a controlled situation, rather than starting them outside in a large bed. \
When the plants in the cells are large enough and sightly root bound, the plugs can be transplanted to a larger container like a 6-pack, pot or directly in the garden. Trays with long narrow planting cells also work well for starting some plants.\
In the full trays, I plant onions. Some of the long trays are cut into two or four pieces for smaller quantities of plants. Quick germinating and fast growing plants (cabbage, kale, mustards, lettuce) are planted together. In a slower germinating group are celery, parsley, basil and herbs. A warm group would be tomatoes, eggplants and peppers. Larger seeds like cucumbers and melons can be started in six packs. Peas, green beans and squash are started in 3\'94-4\'94 pots.\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-1440\sl288\slmult1\sa40\ql\qnatural

\b \cf0 Potting Bench\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-1440\sl288\slmult1\sa40\ql\qnatural

\b0 \cf0 For planting seeds or transplanting seedlings a potting bench is helpful. It can be simple. Mine is a board covered with plastic on a wood stand in the basement.\
For starting seeds and transplanting to 6-packs, I mix a prepared seed starter mix 50/50 with my best garden soil. Planning ahead, I bring buckets of soil into the basement in late fall, or mulch an area that I can access when the ground is frozen in early spring if I need more soil.\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-1440\sl288\slmult1\sa40\ql\qnatural

\b \cf0 Cold frames \
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-1440\sl288\slmult1\sa40\ql\qnatural

\b0 \cf0 To protect young seedlings or plants from cold weather and to \'93harden them off\'94 (adjust to being in full sunlight), I use cold frame covers on top of my raised beds.\
They can be wood frames with plastic or twin-wall polycarbonate.\
Another option is to put mulch hay bales around a planting bed, with plastic stretched over the bales.\
Spinach planted in late August, was eaten in the fall. It over-wintered in a cold frame under three feet of snow. On April 2 its still alive.\
As the weather warms, the spinach begins to grow. In the cool spring weather it produces abundant growth before the warmer temperatures causes it to bolt and go to flower and seed.\
On the south side of our home, nestled in an area between small building bump-outs, I built two raised beds. This area is a protected micro climate and warms up faster than open areas. Cold tolerant plants, such as cabbages, kale, mustard greens and some herbs, were started in plug trays, transplanted to four-packs and pots and were planted in the beds at the end of March. In the front bed, soil was still to cold to plant. Cold frame covers can be vented or opened in warm weather. For unusually cold weather or snow, a second frame cover or old fleece blanket on top adds more protection.\
Boards were added to the beds making them taller to accommodate the growth of plants. Covers are added early to warm soil before planting.\
Plastic covered hoop greenhouses extend the growing season in spring and fall. When cold frames are used inside greenhouses they provide more protection from the cold and an even longer growing season.\
\
Growing plants in cell trays saves a lot of time making succession plantings. When one crop is finished, like peas or beans, they are pulled out and new plants, such as lettuce or winter cabbages are planted in that space. There are always plants growing.\
Little plants started in plug trays do not suffer transplanting shock. Their roots are intact and have not been disturbed, so will not wilt. When placed in an outside bed, they immediately start growing.\
They need to be hardened off so they do not get sun burned.\
\
When transplanting plants, the mulch is spread open and the plant inserted in the soil. When planting seeds, the mulch is raked off and moved to another bed to mulch other plants.  \
\
If there is an empty bed during the summer or fall, \uc0\u8232 it is covered with mulch until it is planted.\
For this fall planting of mustards, just twelve seeds of six different varieties were planted in cell plug trays and then transplanted into the beds. \
With plugs every plant grows. It is an efficient, productive use of garden space. There are no empty spots where transplants have died.\
\
Plants are rotated each year, so they grow in a different bed. A garden plan makes it easy to see from year to year where specific plants were grown.\
\
Right: 
\b Potatoes 
\b0 Each bed has two long rows where seed potatoes are planted. As the potato plants grow, a thick mulch is added around them to keep the soil damp and cool.\
Left: Harvested 
\b garlic 
\b0 in wheelbarrow    \uc0\u8232 Right: 
\b Onions
\b0  still growing. \
In another month the onion tops will begin to yellow and fall over. I pick them and place them in the empty sheep greenhouse to harden off for winter storage.\
\
G
\b arlic 
\b0 was planted and mulched in the fall, usually late September. The bulbs root up during the fall, and it is one of the first plants up in the spring. By mid July garlic is ready to harvest.\
I grow a lot of garlic for us and the animals.\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-1440\sl288\slmult1\sa40\ql\qnatural

\b \cf0 Sweet Potatoes 
\b0 can be started from slips you grow from tubers or purchased as slips mail order. They grow well in warm weather with loose fertile soil.\

\b Fall storage cabbages 
\b0 for cold storage or making sauerkraut are started in cell plugs in early June, and transplanted into six packs or 4\'94 pots depending on the weather and where they will be planted in the garden.\
Cabbages grow very fast during the cooler September and October weather.\

\b Asparagus 
\b0 A perennial, it needs lime and a yearly top dressing. The new shoots are a spring favorite. \

\b Swiss Chard\
Carrots 
\b0 grow well in a raised bed. They do not like a wet soggy soil. This year had some large wild ones!\

\b Edible Podded Peas 
\b0 Delicious spring treat! Available in short or tall varieties.\

\b Tomatoes and Horseradish\
Lettuce and Herbs\
Spinach, mustards, lettuce and radishes 
\b0 are planted in early August. Spinach can be picked till snow and it will over winter in the garden with or without a cold frame. It is up early in the spring and will produce an abundant crop until the weather gets hot. \

\b Grapes 
\b0 once established, produce abundant fruit for eating or wine.\
Grapes are fun to freeze for winter eating.\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-1440\sl288\slmult1\sa40\qc

\b\fs28 \cf0 Grow more food over a longer period of time.\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-1440\sl288\slmult1\sa40\qc

\b0\fs24 \cf0 The benefit to making successive plantings is a continuous supply of vegetables. \
You can double or triple the amount of food you grow in the same amount of space.\
Garden on September 22, 2018. \
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-1440\sl288\slmult1\sa40\qc

\b\fs28 \cf0 Many plants are cold tolerant, and will keep on producing.\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-1440\sl288\slmult1\sa40\qc

\b0\fs24 \cf0 Garden on October 28, 2016. Four mulched beds are planted with garlic, and other beds mulched to prepare for winter.
\b \
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-1440\sl288\slmult1\sa40\ql\qnatural

\b0 \cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-1440\sl288\slmult1\sa40\ql\qnatural

\b \cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-1440\sl288\slmult1\sa40\ql\qnatural

\b0 \cf0 \
}