{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1038\cocoasubrtf360
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww10800\viewh8400\viewkind0
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-1440\sl240\sb80\ql\qnatural

\f0\fs24 \cf0 These were my first chickens, four hens and two roosters.\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-1440\sl240\sb80\ql\qnatural

\b\fs28 \cf0 Chickens will move right into your heart!\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-1440\sl240\sb80\ql\qnatural

\b0\fs24 \cf0 Endearing personalities, fun to watch and smart. \
\
For years I had large vegetable and flower gardens. I had never thought about raising chickens. \
A good friend kept pestering me about getting chickens, as she really loved her flock. One day she called saying a hen came out of the bushes with six chicks. She wanted me to have them. I knew nothing about raising chickens, so with her help we planned and my husband built a small portable coop with roosts, nesting boxes, a door to close at night to keep them safe and a roof that lifted up on one side to make cleaning easy. With handles and wheels it moved like a big wheelbarrow.\
\
To make a pen to contain the chicks, I used chicken wire fencing and posts. I quickly found out that the chicks would fly off their house roof over the fence, so I put bird netting over the pen. \
Every several days, I set up a new area, and moved the house, when the chicks were in at night. They woke up to a new yard! The chicks were small so they did not need a large area to start. \
As the chickens got older, I created pens with mulch piles for them to scratch and explore. It kept them very busy.\
\
Chickens are easy animals to start raising. \
The start up equipment is minimal: housing, fencing, and containers for feed, water, grit and dusts baths. Build new or modify structures and resources you have. Everyone\'92s set ups are unique and personal.\
Using a permanent house, chickens can be managed free range, or kept in a chicken-wire fenced pen with bird net above. With a portable house and electric poultry fencing (nets) they can be moved around a yard or field.\
Chickens are creatures of habit, so new things can confuse them. If you move their house and pen, do it at night while they are all inside sleeping.\
In the evening, chickens go to bed, \'93roost\'94 early. All you have to do is close their door to protect them from predators.\
Chickens taking a dust bath\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-1440\sl240\sb80\qj
\cf0 Chickens are insectivores.\
The chicken\'92s favorite foods are bugs, insects and worms found in mulch and soil. Scratching in mulch and dirt is their first choice to find food.\
They also eat grass, weeds, and garden plants such as kale, cabbage, most greens, tomatoes, and fruit. My friend\'92s grandfather fed whole grains (corn, oats, barley), as he felt they were more nutritious than cracked grains.\
To further increase the nutritional value of the grains I now soak and sprout grains for chickens and geese. I start the seeds in a large mixing bowl and soak them for 12 hours, then drain the water. Once a day the seeds are rinsed and drained. Seeds can be used as feed with small 1/2\'94 sprouts, or thinly spread out in a pan to grow larger. To have a continuous supply, start new seeds every day. Warmer temperatures (70\'b0+) make them grow faster.\
Chickens need fresh water for drinking, grit for grinding food in their gizzard, and a source of minerals for their egg shells.\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-1440\sl240\sb80\ql\qnatural
\cf0 \
At our new home in Maine, we built a chicken coop on the south side of a shed. I keep renovating the original design to make it healthier for the chickens. Now on the front are used glass storm windows so there is more light. I can also open one of the windows to let the chickens into the attached greenhouse during the winter. On the door and ends are 1/4\'94 metal hardware cloth for ventilation and to keep predators out. As the weather gets colder, I put pieces of 1/8\'94 plywood over the open screened areas to cut down the drafts.\
Its fun to make areas for the chickens to scratch for food. During the winter, in front of the greenhouse, I put my barn residue; hay, straw and feces from the sheep. In the spring it is full and has had the winter to begin composting. The bottom layer is full of red worms. I put up a perimeter chicken wire fence with netting above and then open the bottom plastic on the greenhouse. The chickens are safe and contained and have access to the outside pen, greenhouse or the chicken house to lay their eggs.\
\
Chickens like to roost up high. In the coop, chickens roost four feet off the ground on small tree trunks which provide a good size for chicken feet to grasp. Chickens need plenty of roosting area. \
There is a large area underneath the roosts for them to move around during the day. The little boxes (in front) are for feed. Chickens are fed twice a day and only what they will eat, no more. Leaving extra food around will attract rats.\
\
Floor litter can be wood shavings or sand. In warm weather chickens need a lot of ventilation, and in winter fresh air without drafts. High humidity and no fresh air can cause health problems \
Chickens need enough boxes to lay eggs. No matter how many laying boxes there are, the chickens will all want to lay in the same box!\
\
Chickens are hardy and grow thick warm feathers for the winter. At night, chickens need to be warm enough in their house so their combs, waddles and feet do not freeze. During very cold weather, a incandescent light bulb can be used for extra heat.\
During the day, chickens can be inside or outside, or have access to a sunken cold frame or a greenhouse. In the fall, the greenhouse can be planted with greens that the chickens will eat when it gets colder.\
\
At first, I let the chickens in the sheep barn during the winter. I thought it was a good idea, but\'85\
After I saw chickens standing on the sheep keeping their feet warm and leaving their \'93calling cards\'94 (poop) on their fleeces, and then scratching in the straw bedding, throwing it all over the resting sheep\'85 NO more chickens in the barn! \
The black chickens are Ameraucana which lay green eggs and multi-colored are Welsummer which lay dark red-brown eggs. They are good egg layers and also meat birds. The large eggs are goose eggs.\
A wide variety of chicken breeds  are available from small and large hatcheries. Other sources are poultry groups, local raisers or farms.\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-1440\sl240\sb80\sa180\ql\qnatural
\cf0 After laying eggs for a while, hens go broody. They just want to sit in a nest box on a clutch of eggs and hatch them. Sometimes they find a secluded spot and sit for 21 days and then appear with their chicks.\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-1440\sl240\sb80\ql\qnatural
\cf0 Hiding under the ramp to the sheep barn, this hen hatched her brood on the first day of spring. The temperature was 18\'b0! The chicks were all walking around acting normal. When they needed to get warm they went under the hen or under her wings. \
I was amazed when I first saw this, as the information about raising day-old chicks from a hatchery said the temperature had to be 90\'b0!\
Momma hens do a fantastic job raising their chicks.\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-1440\sl240\sb80\sa140\ql\qnatural
\cf0 Ms. Blackie was my oldest hen...13 years old!\uc0\u8232 A mother to many chicks which she hatched or adopted as day-old chicks from the hatchery.\
My feed for new chicks are small grains (millet, quinoa, amaranth) and seeds (flax, sesame, lightly ground sunflower), a little either hard boiled or scrambled egg, and grass or greens cut in small pieces. A small chick waterer with a screw on bottle makes it easy for chicks to drink.\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-1440\sl240\sb80\ql\qnatural
\cf0 Hens are incredible mothers!\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-1440\sl240\sb80\sa140\ql\qnatural
\cf0 I ordered 25 rooster chicks to use for meat. The day-old chicks arrived, and I had a very broody hen. So that night I took away her new eggs and put the 25 chicks under her. In the morning she was so excited to have her hatched brood of chicks. As the chicks grew larger, other hens joined the momma to help take care of them.\
\
If broody hens are managed to keep them separated in the hen house (in a wire dog cage), seen, but other hens do not have access to her nest to lay eggs, they are successful hatchers. They make the job of raising chicks really easy. I believe hen-raised chicks are stronger and healthier.\
I have thought about getting an incubator, except they are plastic and some have added antimicrobials.\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-1440\sl240\sb80\ql\qnatural
\cf0 For moveable outdoor pens, these roosters (for meat) could go under the house to be out of the hot sun and be safe from overhead predators. At night the ramp/door is closed and they are safe inside behind chicken wire and hardware cloth. \
For laying hens, boxes for egg laying need to be added. For winter, a pen like this could be moved into a greenhouse.\
Note: Moveable houses need wheels to make them easy to move. For fencing, use electric poultry netting and a solar charger. Chicken wire and posts take a lot of time to set up, are heavy to move and chickens can escape.\
\
After the roosters quickly tore up the grass in a soft wet clay soil area, I moved them to a drained gravely soil where they stayed for a month. Poultry netting kept them from flying out of the pen. They were fed greens from the garden plus grains.\
\
Raising chickens for meat\
There are many creative ideas for raising meat chickens with pens that are moved along the ground so they can eat the pasture plants and bugs. See Joel Salatin, Polyface Farm or look on the internet for ideas.\
Pens need to be easy to move (wheels), predator safe, have a protected area from sun or rain, area for water and feed, and large enough for the growing chickens.\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-1440\sl240\sb80\sa140\ql\qnatural
\cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-1440\sl240\sb80\ql\qnatural
\cf0 \
}