{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1038\cocoasubrtf360
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww11360\viewh12560\viewkind0
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-1440\sl240\sb80\ql\qnatural

\f0\b\fs24 \cf0 Growing our own delicious, nutritious food \uc0\u8232 is enjoyable and satisfying. 
\b0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-1440\sl240\sb80\ql\qnatural
\cf0 \kerning1\expnd-1\expndtw-2
Fertile soil is the key to raising healthy plants and animals. \
We do not use pesticides, \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 drugs or other chemicals that disrupt or destroy the environment. \
\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-1440\sl240\sb80\ql\qnatural

\b \cf0 We all stand on the shoulders of those \uc0\u8232 who came before us. \

\b0 Many people have generously shared their knowledge and experience. We also want to share what we have learned. \

\b \
Everyone has the right to eat healthy food\

\b0 Even if you grow one tomato, a container of lettuce or herbs, your action will make a difference. \
If you can\'92t have a garden or raise animals, \uc0\u8232 you can support local:
\b \

\b0 \'95 CSAs (Community Supported Agriculture)\uc0\u8232 \'95 farmers markets\u8232 \'95 food cooperatives (co-ops)\u8232 \'95 farms \

\b Every dollar you spend locally supports \uc0\u8232 your community. \

\b0 Working together, we can all have access to nutritious food, be healthier, and create an environment that \uc0\u8232 is safe and nurturing for all living creatures! \u8232 It is the greatest gift we can give to our children.
\b \
\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-1440\sl240\sb80\ql\qnatural

\b0\fs22 \cf0 There is a lot more than flowers in our front yard!\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-1440\sl240\sb80\ql\qnatural

\fs24 \cf0 Its fun to grow different vegetables and fruits\'85 grapes, asparagus, sweet potatoes.\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-1440\sl240\sb80\ql\qnatural

\fs20 \cf0 We respect the beauty and complexity of the world that supports our lives. \
The wisdom of nature is our guide. \
\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-1440\sl240\sb80\ql\qnatural

\fs22 \cf0 Rosie, our dog, is not fooled\'85 this carrot is no bone!\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-1440\sl240\sb80\ql\qnatural

\fs24 \cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-1440\sl240\sb80\ql\qnatural

\fs22 \cf0 \
}