{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1138\cocoasubrtf510
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 CenturyOldStyle-Regular;\f1\fnil\fcharset0 MinionPro-Regular;\f2\fnil\fcharset0 LucidaHandwriting-Italic;
}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww10800\viewh8400\viewkind0
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-1440\sl240\sb80

\f0\fs24 \cf0 Why sheep? \
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-1440\sl240\sb40
\cf0 Sheep filled many of my needs: \
\'96 \uc0\u8232 ruminant manure and barn bedding for gardens and compost,\
\'96 my interest in pastures and grazing, \
\'96 wool is an incredible fiber,\
\'96 organically raised meat\
\'96 \uc0\u8232 moderate size, easy to handle individually and in a flock.\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-1440\sl240\sb80
\cf0 With two acres open and some areas wet, smaller animals made sense. \
\
I bought five Border Leicester ewe lambs (four months old) in July. I had that summer to learn about grazing and handling them, a winter feeding hay, and a second summer of grazing. In fall, their second year, they were bred, lambing the next spring. I paid to use a Coopworth ram to service the ewes for the first two breeding years. That way I did not have to keep two separate groups of sheep, rams and ewes. \
Border Leicesters have clean faces and legs (no fleece), and Roman noses.\
Mr. Lucky the Coopworth ram.\
\
I learn from the sheep every day.\
Their friendly, gentle quiet ways, observing, trusting, and communicating about their needs. \
It is special seeing ewes birthing, and caring for the lambs.\
The sheep and geese are never in the same pen, so this display of affection was amazing.\
\
Sheep graze all around our property. \uc0\u8232 They are our solar lawnmowers!\
The ram Mr. Blue and ram lambs enjoy resting among the rocks.\
\
Winter\
Winter is a quiet time.\
Also, a time of waiting\'85 for spring shearing, April lambs and spring grass. \
Its a wonderful opportunity to spend closeup time with the sheep. When the sheep are out grazing in the pasture they are focused on eating! .\
Sheep are hardy, but need access to shelter during winter snow, rain and wind storms. The greenhouse barn provides shelter with plenty of ventilation and light.\
Attached to the 24\'92 x 21\'92 greenhouse barn is a 16\'92 x 16\'92 fenced paddock where the ewes can be outside in good weather. \
In mid-November, Angelo the ram is introduced to the ewes to be bred.\
The ram is with the ewes for 32 days (two, seventeen--day cycles.) Gestation is five months, with lambs arriving in mid-April when the grass is beginning to grow. Fresh grass is important for the lactating ewes, so they have plenty of nutritious milk for their lambs.\
The ram is \'93half the flock,\'94 so it is important he is healthy and well-bred. \
Rams and ram lambs are kept separate from the ewes. They have their own simple lean-to shelter attached to one of the small hay sheds. Covered with greenhouse plastic, it is \'93like being outdoors,\'94 yet provides ventilation and protection from winter winds, snow and rain.\
\
Shearing\
Shearing the sheep\'92s fleece is done about four weeks before lambing in mid-March. My Border Leicesters and Coopworth crosses are sheared once a year. \
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-1440\sl288\slmult1
\cf0 After the fleece is sheared off the sheep, it is carried to a skirting table and laid flat, cut side down.
\f1 \

\f0 Friends come to the shearing and and help skirt and clean the fleece, taking off areas that are soiled, full of VM, matted or irregular.\
Before\
After\
When sheep eat hay and lie in straw bedding their fleece gets full of vegetable matter (VM).\
I now put coats on my sheep, to keep their fleeces clean.\
\
Fleece\
Words and photos cannot convey the incredible experience of feeling a warm newly-shorn fleece, thick and soft with a touch of lanolin. \
Each fleece is different. Ewe, ram and lamb fleeces have their own character. Fleeces also change with a new breeding ram. 
\f1 \

\f0 Left is outside, right is cut sheared side of  fleece.
\f1 \

\f0 Left is outside, lower right is cut sheared side of  fleece.
\f1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-1440\sl240\sb80

\f0 \cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-1440\sl288\slmult1

\fs46 \cf0 Wool is an amazing fiber!\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-1440\sl288\slmult1

\fs30 \cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-1440\sl288\slmult1

\b\fs26 \cf0 Wool provides the most warmth with the least weight.\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-1440\sl288\slmult1

\b0\fs24 \cf0 \'95 Keeps you warm, even when it is wet.\
\'95 Absorbs water vapor, but repels water.\
\'95 \uc0\u8232 Wool can hold as much as 30% of its weight in moisture and not feel damp.\
\'95 Insulates against colder or hotter air.\
\'95 \uc0\u8232 Fiber crimp gives fabric greater bulk, and holds air, so the fabric retains heat. It impedes heat transfer, so is a good insulator fabric.\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-1440\sl288\slmult1

\b \cf0 Wool is durable\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-1440\sl288\slmult1

\b0 \cf0 \'95 Elasticity of the fiber gives more durability.\
\'95 \uc0\u8232 Resiliency of the fiber to spring back to original shape after being under tension.\
\'95 Fiber can stretch 1/3 of its length without breaking.\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-1440\sl288\slmult1

\b \cf0 Wool is soil resistant\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-1440\sl288\slmult1

\b0 \cf0 \'95 \uc0\u8232 The fiber surface covered with overlapping scales keeps dirt from going through fleece. The sheep\'92s skin keeps clean. \
\'95 \uc0\u8232 Wool is easy to clean as the dirt does not penetrate the fiber.\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-1440\sl288\slmult1

\b \cf0 Wool is not flammable.\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-1440\sl288\slmult1

\b0 \cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-1440\sl288\slmult1

\b \cf0 There are many different sheep breeds worldwide, \uc0\u8232 each with it own fleece characteristics and uses.
\b0 \
\'95 Breeds: fine wools, longwools, multi-coated\
\'95 Variations in fiber length, fineness and luster\
\'95 \uc0\u8232 Wool can be carded into batts, spun into yarn for knitting and weaving, or felted\'85 \
\'95 \uc0\u8232 Used for clothing, coats, hats, shoes, blankets, mattresses, comforters, rugs, insulation, yurts\'85 \
The dark yarn in this sweater was hand spun and knit from one of my fleeces by a friend\
Yarn spun and knit from my fleeces.\
The fleece on the back of three different sheep.\

\b New born lambs\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-1440\sl288\slmult1

\b0 \cf0 I would worry about ewes birthing in very cold spring weather, especially at night, and the wet lambs getting cold, hyperthermic and dying.\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-1440\sl288\slmult1

\b \cf0 Then I realized\'85 \uc0\u8232 lambs are born with \u8232 \'93beautiful thick wool coats\'94 \u8232 which keep them warm \u8232 even when they are wet!\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-1440\sl288\slmult1

\b0 \cf0 Left is outside, lower right is cut sheared side of  fleece.
\f1 \

\f0 \
Lambs\
Lambs are born in mid April, so they will be big enough to go out on the spring grass in May. The new grass in May provides the ewe with an excellent source of food, so she can make plenty of milk for her nursing lambs. Ewes have two teats, but can have one, two or three lambs. Singles get a lot to eat, twins have their own teat and triplets have to share.\
\
Waiting\'85 \
Keeping ewes healthy can avoid problems with gestation, birthing, \uc0\u8232 lactation, and lambs nursing. \
Ewes are wonderful mothers, licking the lambs all over after they are born. Lambs are standing, rooting for the teat and nursing within 10 to 30 minutes after birth. The ewe\'92s first-milk, colostrum, is high in antibodies which protect the lamb against almost all bacterial, viral and fungal infections and disease. New born lambs nurse frequently. I saw a ewe gently paw her sleeping lamb that it was time to nurse. The ewe teaches twin lambs to nurse together. \
\
Ewes and their new lambs are put in a \'93lambing jug.\'94 Separated from the rest of the sheep, so the ewe can bond and take care of her lambs and the lambs can begin to nurse. Lambs are weighed daily for the first week, and gain between 1/2 to 1 pound a day.\
\
In about a week, when the lambs are bonded to their mother and are nursing well, they are combined with another ewe and her lambs. As they are ready, they are combined with other groups.\
Nap time\
Lambs begin nibbling on hay the first week, eating more and more until they start to eat grass.\
Ewes are very patient with their nursing lambs.\
All the ewes and lambs are in one group, and are taking a midday rest.\
\
The greenhouse barn has sides that roll up for more ventilation on warm days. Bright and cheerful, it is a safe home for the lambs until they go out on grass.\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-1440\sl288\slmult1

\f2\i\fs54 \cf0 Lambs on Grass\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-1440\sl288\slmult1

\f0\i0\fs24 \cf0 It is vital the ewe and lambs establish a strong nursing relationship. \
The lambs will grow and thrive if \uc0\u8232 they are efficient strong nursers.\
\
At about two weeks old, lambs have access to an outdoor pasture during the day. They learn to stay together as a flock, to keep track of mom, and to stay away from the electric fence.\
\
Sheep eat grass with vigor and energy. They eat a lot of grass, especially lactating ewes. Sheep usually eat, chew cud or rest as a group. Any behavior, such as sitting down, or not staying with the flock, when all are eating may indicate a sick or injured sheep.\
\
Top and left photos show sheep just moved to new grass. In front is grass they grazed the day before.\
\
To fully develop their rumens, it is important that lambs have access to enough forage. A well-developed rumen will support their growth, and in the coming years pregnancies and lactations.\
Below: During dry times or drought, supplemental cut grass and plants or hay are fed in a tub or on the ground.\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-1440\sl288\slmult1

\f2\i\fs54 \cf0 Grazing Sheep\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-1440\sl288\slmult1

\f0\i0\fs24 \cf0 My sheep are moved every day to a new paddock to graze. This \'93Management Intensive Grazing\'94 provides them with fresh, lush forage to eat every day. By using many small paddocks, usually twenty one, but up to forty in dry weather, the grass and pasture plants have time to regrow by the time the sheep regraze the paddock. This rest time also breaks the parasite cycle reducing worm load in the pasture and sheep.\
Portable electric netting and solar chargers make it easy to set up and move paddocks.\
Water buckets and a mineral/salt box move with the sheep daily. In hot weather, tree shade or a shade structure keep the sheep cool.\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-1440\sl288\slmult1

\f2\i\fs54 \cf0 Sheep Coats\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-1440\sl240\sb80

\f0\i0\fs24 \cf0 The ewes spent the summer at a neighbors farm. It was a very dry year, and the grass was not growing, so the sheep were supplemented with hay starting in August. When sheep begin eating hay (or are in a barn with straw bedding), they are fitted for coats to keep their fleece clean. If you are raising sheep to sell fleeces to handspinners, the cleaner the fleece, the more money you can charge per pound.\
If you do not use coats, it takes a lot of time to pick out the vegetative matter, and you will never get it all out.\
The sheep wear coats all winter. When coats become tight due to growing fleece and the pregnant ewes, they get larger coats. After March shearing, sheep wear coats to keep them warmer during cold spring weather, and to keep them clean until they stop eating hay and begin grazing grass in May.\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-1440\sl288\slmult1

\f2\i\fs54 \cf0 Older Lambs\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-1440\sl240\sb80

\f0\i0\fs24 \cf0 Older lambs nurse less often and very briefly. It may not seem like much, but the lambs get immune support from the milk. It helps them stay healthy, even when the summer grass is not the best quality and the exposure to worms is highest. Ewes decide when to stop nursing their lambs. Ram lambs are separated from the flock in early September, when the days shorten and the temperatures get cooler.\
\
\
During fall, when there is some grass and sheep are supplemented with hay, they also graze on the acorns from red oak trees. The tannins in the acorns are known to expel worms. Acorns are also a nutritious food source.\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-1440\sl240\sb80

\fs21 \cf0 Apples are a special fall treat.\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-1440\sl240\sb80

\fs24 \cf0 One year, when the sheep came home for breeding and the winter, I put them in a fenced area in the front yard. I woke early and looked out my window to see them resting among the rocks.\
\
In early November, the ewes and ewe lambs come home from a neighbors field. The ewes to be bred are separated from the rest of the sheep. Ewes have their feet trimmed, coats fitted and then they are ready for the ram.\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-1440\sl240\sb80

\fs22 \cf0 Ram Angelo and Ewe Phoebe\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-1440\sl240\sb80

\fs21 \cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-1440\sl240\sb80

\i\fs28 \cf0 And the year begins again\'85
\i0\fs24 \
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-1440\sl288\slmult1
\cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-1440\sl240\sb80
\cf0 \
\
\
\
\
}