{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1138\cocoasubrtf510
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 LucidaHandwriting-Italic;\f1\fnil\fcharset0 CenturyOldStyle-Regular;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww14060\viewh17680\viewkind0
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-1440\sl240\sb80

\f0\i\fs54 \cf0 1The Sheep \
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-1440\sl240\sb80

\f1\i0\fs24 \cf0 Why sheep? \
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-1440\sl240\sb40
\cf0 Sheep filled many needs: \
\'96 \uc0\u8232 ruminant manure and barn bedding for gardens and compost,\
\'96 my interest in pastures and grazing, \
\'96 wool is an incredible fiber,\
\'96 organically raised meat\
\'96 \uc0\u8232 moderate size, easy to handle individually and in a flock.\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-1440\sl240\sb80
\cf0 With two acres open and some areas wet, smaller animals made sense. \
I bought five Border Leicester ewe lambs (four months old) in July. I had that summer to learn about grazing and handling them, a winter feeding hay, and a second summer of grazing. In fall, their second year, they were bred, lambing the next spring. I paid to use a Coopworth ram to service the ewes for the first two breeding years. That way I did not have to keep two separate groups of sheep, rams and ewes. \
Mr. Lucky the Coopworth ram.\
Border Leicesters have clean faces and legs (no fleece), and Roman noses.\
2\
I learn from the sheep every day.\
Their friendly, gentle quiet ways, observering, trusting, and communicating about their needs. \
It is special seeing ewes birthing, and caring for the lambs.\
The sheep and geese are never in the same pen, so this display of affection was amazing.\
Sheep graze all around our property. \uc0\u8232 They are our solar lawnmowers!\
3\
Winter is a quiet time.\
Also, a time of waiting\'85 for spring shearing\'85 April lambs\'85 and spring grass. \
Its a wonderful opportunity to spend closeup time with the sheep.\
When the sheep are out grazing in the pasture they are focused on \uc0\u8232 eating! .\
Attached to the 24\'92 x 21\'92 greenhouse barn is a 16\'92 x 16\'92 fenced paddock where the ewes can be outside in good weather. This year we had so much snow the fence disappeared!\
In mid-November, Angelo the ram is introduced to the ewes to be bred.\
The ram is in with the ewes for two, seventeen--day cycles. Gestation is five months, with lambs arriving in mid-April.\
The ram is \'93half the flock,\'94 so it is important he is healthy and well-bred.\
In mid-November, Angelo the ram is introduced to the ewes to be bred.\
The ram is in with the ewes for two, seventeen--day cycles. Gestation is five months, with lambs arriving in mid-April.\
The ram is \'93half the flock,\'94 so it is important he is healthy and well-bred.\
Sheep are hardy, but need access to shelter during winter snow, rain and wind storms. The greenhouse barn provides shelter with plenty of ventilation and light.}